The Election Commission of India (ECI) is the constitutional authority responsible for conducting elections in India. The ECI website is a storehouse of information about the candidates who contest the elections, and about those who finally come to power.



The ECI publishes statistics reports of each of the elections. The reports contain a large amount of data, though it is given in a format that is easy to read but not to analyse. The data has to be extracted and cleaned before it can be analysed.

Data is in PDF , where there are 10,000 pages.
Challenge is how to make it in structured data like excel, csv or txt.
Tablue can work, for not for this huge data set.
xPDF helps to move PDF to TXT, but there will be issues like blanks rows added,columns not perfectly
aligned.


To start data cleaning one needs to check data.
Below are things that one can notice in ECI data set

When Data was extracted for each constituency for every year.
it was seen that few constituencies had no candidate for some years in between, then they had candidates suddely reappeared.
Example of constituency is BHADRACHALAM

How that is possible?
Looking at other rows got to know that BHADRACHELAM is constituency where constituency has candidates
exactly in years which were missing for earlier constituency
That means either constituency name was changed or it was a spelling mistake.

What we can see with ECI data is:
Parties can be mis-spelt:
MADMK
MAMAK
MDMK are all same

Parties Name changed:
AIADMK
ADMK
ADK

parties restructure
INC(I)
INC

Constituency names mis-spelt
BHADRACHELAM
BHADRACHALAM
BHADRACALAM


Phonetically Similar Words:
MADIRA
MADHIRA
MADOOR

DEVERKONDA
DEVARAKONDA
DEVARKONA

So above was auto detection, how one auto corrects?
Either compare which keyword gets maximum results from google
or check data, where are maximum rows for any keyword
Example:
SULURPET 38 rows
SULLURPET 9 rows
SULLURPETA 9 rows

we can go with 1st one, SULURPET


Make sure you correctly identify these issues and resolve them before moving on to the next stage of data cleaning.



Checklist for Fixing Rows

Delete summary rows: Total, Subtotal rows
Delete incorrect rows: Header rows, Footer rows
Delete extra rows: Column number, indicators, Blank rows, Page No.



Checklist for Fixing Columns

Merge columns for creating unique identifiers if needed: E.g. Merge State, City into Full address
Split columns for more data: Split address to get State and City to analyse each separately
Add column names: Add column names if missing

Rename columns consistently: Abbreviations, encoded columns

Delete columns: Delete unnecessary columns

Align misaligned columns: Dataset may have shifted columns
More things are in Data+clearning+_+CheckList.xlsx

